Today we're on the
show "Mind Shift"
talking with Richard
Dolan, who asks
is there an extraterrestrial
presence in our world?
If so, what form does
this actually take?
Based on his years
of study, Dolan
believes that ETs
actually exist that are
in contact with elements of what
he calls a "secret government."
This elite group may constitute
what Dolan likes to call
a breakaway civilization.
He believes they've developed
super futuristic technology,
is able to access
zero point energy,
and perhaps travel
to other worlds.
George Hansen is the
author of "The Trickster
and the Paranormal."
In his work, Hansen looks at
the idea of the trickster,
this idea of liminal
experiences that
cross between our
usual distinctions
between subjective and
objective, real and imaginary,
true and false.
Is our whole paradigm
for understanding
the nature of
reality on the verge
of changing on us yet again?
[THEME MUSIC]
[APPLAUSE]
Hi, everybody.
Welcome "Mind Shift."
I'm your host, Daniel Pinchbeck.
Today, our first guest is
the amazing UFOlogist Richard
Dolan.
He is the author of the
two volume history, UFOs
and National Security State,
Chronology of a Cover-up"
and "AD, at your Disclosure,
the People's Guide to Life
After Contact."
On this show, we're gonna
be asking the questions,
is there a secret government
that has developed
hyper futuristic technologies?
Is there an ET
presence in our world?
And also, what does it mean
if so, and why should we care?
I hope you'll stay with us,
and enjoy this amazing episode.
Thank you so much.
NARRATOR: Among the
world's leading historians
on the subject of
UFOs, Richard Dolan
is the author of "UFOs and
the National Security State,"
volumes one and two, and
"AD, After Disclosure,
When the Government
Finally Reveals
the Truth About Alien Contact."
He's the host of the Richard
Dolan Show on KGRA Radio
every Saturday,
and a regular guest
on Coast to Coast AM Radio.
Through his work, he poses
important questions, such as,
what does a UFO presence
mean for our civilization,
why the cover-up up will
end within our lifetime,
and what will happen
after it is exposed.
Be on the lookout for his
new, groundbreaking work,
"UFOs for the 21st
Century Mind."
[APPLAUSE]
So, Richard, thank you so much
for joining me on the show.
Daniel, thanks for having me.
I really appreciate your work.
I think it's really
extraordinary, just
the depth of it and everything.
And maybe you could just give us
a brief summary of what you've
done, and what your
current state of thinking
is around the ET presence.
Sure.
Well, yes.
I fell-- I like I think
I fell into this field
about 20 years ago.
Back then, I was working
on a doctoral dissertation
in US Cold War studies.
It had nothing to do with flying
saucers, or UFOs, or aliens.
It's not something that one
does in the academic world,
typically, but I
became obsessed.
There's really no
other word for it.
I came across some UFO books
that intrigued me, that dealt
with the early
Cold War, which was
the period that I was really
immersed in at that time.
You've gone through
masses of documentation
around the whole subject.
Well, absolutely.
So basically my entry
went into the phase of,
let's find out if
there's anything to this.
And I wanted to
know as a historian
and someone who studies
archives, what's the evidence?
And that really just
took me into this field.
I thought initially that I would
spend three or four months.
I mean truly researching this
to solve the riddle for myself.
And of course, it just pulled
me right into the rabbit hole,
and I've been there ever since.
I mean, in your
perspective, there definitely
has been some type of secret
government connections
to an ET presence, or?
Yeah, I would say so.
Again, I had to be pulled to
that conclusion by degrees.
Back in the old days, I did not
believe it was possible to have
a truly grand conspiracy.
I thought, well, you could have
a lot of little conspiracies,
and there's always
corruption and so forth.
But what really drew me to that
conclusion was simply that what
became evident was that through
the brief window in time when
we actually had a reasonably
good freedom of information
act that allowed us to
get declassified documents
from our government, we
have those documents here
in the public domain
now, and what they
proof is not that UFOs are ET.
It doesn't prove
that UFOs are alien,
but it does prove,
I argue strongly,
that there is a phenomenon
that our military
and our intelligence
community has been engaged in,
has been covering up, and
that has concerned them.
It's concerned them.
And I say this because we have
case after case of violations
of highly sensitive
airspace over the years
by objects that, frankly, are
not supposed to have existed,
that are not supposed to exist
to this day, that things that
are not supposed to be possible.
That is disk-shaped
objects that hover
silently, take off
instantly, zigzag,
and all the other things.
And these were events that
concerned-- I mean anyone who'd
be concerned with an
air base or an army base
would obviously be
concerned about this,
and they certainly were.
So at the same time that they're
telling the public, nothing
to see, keep moving along,
clearly this was something
that was concerning them.
So that was the hook.
Now, when you add up all of
those disparate documents,
and you group them
together, what you see
is that this is a big, big, big,
thing, whatever this thing is.
And it's something that
deserves public discourse
in our broader
community so we can
at least find out what it is.
OK, so that's a narrative
around objects that
have been appearing in the sky.
And so what about more
the idea that there's
been direct ET human contact,
even on an official or secretly
official level?
-All right.
So now we're going into
a combination logic
and, let's say,
leaks and inference.
So if you assume,
as I have now done,
that there are actual physical
objects that have been tracked
and seen, visually seen,
tracked on radar, and all of it,
so they belong to
somebody, presumably.
If they didn't belong
to the Soviets,
and if they don't at least
all seem to belong to us,
then there's this other,
whoever this other is.
So I do work on that assumption.
I think that's the best one
that I can make at this time.
Now, beyond that, you have
claims, some of them seemingly
very credible to me,
of individuals who
have had contact with
non-human entities
in one form or another.
So you've got all of that
mass, that database, let's say.
And then you have,
I guess what we
can say would be leaks, unproven
claims, these that don't come
out of US National Archives,
but nonetheless are individuals
with relatively high
level of background
within the government
who have made
certain types of
statements that, yes
there's a presence here.
They are here,
and there has been
some level of communication
between us and them.
OK.
And what about then-- I
mean, from my understanding
of your work, you
then hypothesize
that there is some type
of secret government,
maybe even what you call
a breakaway civilization.
Right.
Well, I think first of all
with the secret government,
I used to ask myself, back
in my much more naive days,
I thought, well, if I write
the best possible history,
and I just nail it, and I
get all of my facts lined up,
and I make an unanswerable
argument, then, well of course,
I would help to end this
secrecy on the topic.
And of course it didn't
work out that way.
You start studying the media.
You start studying our
academic community,
our scientific community.
And what you find
is that there's
a tremendous amount of control
over those institutions
in many important ways.
And so I ended up
asking myself, well,
what is the actual
structure of power?
Are these institutions
truly independent or not?
If they're not, then
who's in control?
Is the US government
and independent entity?
Is the President
the guy in charge?
Well, turns out, no.
Not really.
And so a parallel
area of my study
has been to try to understand
the true structure of power
here on planet Earth.
Is there an international
power structure, for example?
And does that include
a secret government?
I would argue we have what we
could call a secret government.
And a lot of it
functions in what
we would call our black budget
world, that is the world
of special access programs.
Somebody mentioned to me the
other day that, apparently,
on September 10th 2001,
$2 trillion were announced
just missing from the Pentagon?
Well, that was a
statement by Secretary
of Defense Donald Rumsfeld.
In fact, he'd initially
made the statement in July
of '01, and then remade
that statement, that's true,
on September 10,
2001, indicating that
there was $2.3 trillion
in transactions
that were not accounted for.
That was his word.
And then the very
next day, boom.
Everything goes crazy.
Including, though, the
Pentagon was hit by a missile
in a particular area.
Is that right?
That was the argument made
by Jim Mars, actually.
I think a lot of
people know Jim.
And I have not been able to
independently confirm that,
but that was this argument.
He's an excellent researcher.
But they'd knocked out
the computer that had
managed all those transactions?
I think that's right.
And what you find
in years hence,
this is almost-- it's funny.
It would be funny if
it weren't so tragic.
It's that Dov Zakheim, I
believe that's his name.
He was in charge of resolving
this discrepancy years later.
And I think in by '05,
'06, they said, yes.
We've worked out
the discrepancies,
and we got it down to zero.
-Mhm.
Now, I mean think about this.
From 2.3 to 0?
I could see them getting it
down to maybe half a trillion.
I'm sure some general at the
top said, get that down to zero.
Let's say there is
a bunch of money,
a huge amount of money that's
going into something or other.
What is it going into?
Well, let's
presume for a moment
that something like a UFO
crash retrieval occurred.
Just pretend it happened.
I think that such
things did happen.
I think there's a very good
case to be made for that.
So if you did acquire some kind
of highly exotic technology
back in the 1940s,
what would you do?
A, you wouldn't tell the world
about it, because then you'd
have to begin the
process of sharing
that technology with the world.
And if you're at the top
of this human pyramid,
you wouldn't wanna do that.
So you would need to
study it privately.
You would need to have
a complete clandestine
infrastructure to do that.
You would have to spend money
not simply for R&D, which would
be expensive, let's
face it, but also
for the security,
which would probably
be much more expensive.
This is a lot of money.
You can't just go
through Congress
for the appropriations,
because that gives it away.
So you have to create
a clandestine, not only
infrastructure, but
funding process.
And you need a lot of money.
I'm not saying all of
that money goes into ET,
exotic technology, research, but
I suspect that some of it does.
So do you think that we're
engaged in some larger
cosmic narrative or drama?
Or is there a cosmic war that
involves extraterrestrials,
off-planet beings?
I mean, what do you think is
the larger saga or significant
here?
Well, that's a good question.
Look, the short answer
is, I don't know.
I don't think
anybody truly knows.
Lots of people like
to say that they know,
and I'm not
necessarily persuaded
that they actually do.
I think there's
something happening,
and if you want to
put together all
of the pieces of this puzzle,
it looks, to me anyway,
that there are a
number of groups,
let's just put it in
that term, that are
here for their own purposes.
I look at it logically.
I look at humanity as we
are right now at this point
in history, and we're about to
leap into some new dimension
of our own existence.
What do you think about
Steven Greer's argument,
that if you had an
extraterrestrial civilization
that had developed hyper
futuristic technologies way
beyond where we're
at, they would almost
have to be benevolent, because
otherwise those technologies
would be so destructive we
wouldn't see stars out there,
we would just see bunches
of rubble and gas clouds.
Yeah, I dunno.
I mean, there's a
certain logic to it,
but there's a certain kind
of naivety about it as well.
Look, if we were to go back in
time to some prehistoric era
or pre-modern era, we could
impress the native people there
with our great technology,
and our nice clothing,
and everything else.
And they would say, wow.
You guys have really figured
out all of your problems.
You probably have
solved the problems
of hunger and everything else.
And we would look at
each other and not
say much to these people.
I think it's a fallacy
to say that very advanced
technology equates
to a very, very
benign spiritual development.
You know, the United States
today has the most advanced
military in the world,
and we don't particularly
play nice with our neighbors.
The Nazis in their era
had some of the most
advanced technology, ditto.
I think it's entirely
possible that you could have,
let's say, an interstellar
economic hitman
species that would exist.
That doesn't mean that
they're here to destroy us,
but they could be here to use.
Why not?
I
Use for what?
-What their purposes might be?
-Entertainment?
Food?
-Yeah, I dunno.
I don't know.
Yeah, I remember speaking with
the late Ingo Swann one time.
And he had an experience
where he was observing
a craft draw huge amounts
of water out of this lake
somewhere up in Alaska.
And he was asked by
this gentleman, well,
what were your
impressions of that craft?
And after Ingo calmed
down, he said, look,
I think that's we're
their supermarket.
They said, let's just to go
to Earth, and grab some water,
grab some DNA,
grab some whatever.
What's the use?
And a lot of people have
asked me this question.
What's the use of getting
involved, enmeshed
in this level of understanding?
I mean, does it actually
just depress people?
Or is there a way that we need
to know about this, that it
could help us in some way?
What can we do about it?
Even if we were to discover
there was a secret government
that had a breakaway
civilization that had developed
hyper futuristic free energy,
inter-dimensional travel,
all that kind of stuff.
what it would mean to us?
Well, this is a topic that
people have to be careful with.
I've seen this many, many times.
I've seen brilliant people
get into this topic,
and suddenly they
go through a crisis.
Because you go through your
life up to certain point,
thinking I'm ahead of the curve.
I've got it all figured out.
And then boom, here's this
entirely different reality.
And it is distressing.
It can be distressing to people.
So I would say, you wanna
be strong, psychologically.
And you have to be flexible
in your outlook about things.
But why would someone do it?
And why does this matter?
It matters for a lot of reasons.
A, on an existential level,
if there are these others who
are here, for whatever reason,
whether benign or not benign,
that's important for a
thinking, philosophically
inclined person, who cares
about the meaning of their life.
I think any rational
and reasonable
person would wanna do that.
Now, on a political level, I
think it matters a great deal.
I think that it's imperative
that we as a society
hold our government
accountable to the truth.
I see all too frequently
people saying,
oh, it doesn't matter if the
government discloses or not
on this.
It matters what
we think about it.
That's true in a way.
It matters very much what we,
the people, think about this.
But dammit, we don't
wanna give up holding
our government accountable.
This is supposed to be a
society with a government
accountable to us.
So Obama, normal human
being, or some kind
of alien implant intervention?
Let's say in between.
I think he's a human being.
And like anyone at the top
of our power structure,
is very intimately handled.
No one just gets to
that position by chance.
That never happens.
We have people that are
selected, not elected.
And that was with Obama, and
that was with Bush before,
and that was with Clinton
before him, and so on.
He did seem like the
absolutely perfect, just
in terms of his looks, and--
Totally perfect.
He is the perfect man
to sell brand America
to the rest of the world.
Let's talk a little
bit about the future
and the Disclosure Project.
I mean, I know you've been
involved with the movement
towards disclosure.
I mean, when you talk
about all this other stuff,
and these different
levels of secrecy and son,
you think disclosure is
something that is actually
gonna happen in a public way,
or is it really something that's
just happening almost in a
private and individual way,
in a sense?
Yes, first the latter,
then the former.
What's happening is,
I was dragged into
the whole disclosure movement.
I really didn't
initially just jump in.
But because I write
in a political way,
I think it was natural
that I went that way.
What I think is gonna
happen is disclosure
is gonna be a very
messy process,
but it's an inevitable process.
I think if simply you look at
the trajectory of our society,
you look where we are
today compared with even 20
years ago, let
alone 50 years ago,
we're moving along like a
rocket into some future.
We're 20 years away from your
laptop or your personal device
talking to you maybe as a
conscious, sentient entity
in some way.
Maybe not sentient in the
way we are, but in some way.
We're reinventing ourselves.
We've mapped the genome.
We're on the edge of incredible
nanotech and everything else.
We're decoding reality.
That's right.
And we're recreating
some new reality now.
So to look at our
society 20 years from now
is gonna be a very
different experience
from what we have today.
And I think in that
type of situation,
some form of reality
on this topic
is going to be out in the open.
What I think is happening is
that at the groundswell level,
at the level of the people,
there's change happening.
I think we can see this.
And that will, in
one way or another,
force the government to
make some kind of statement,
because they're
gonna be forced to.
They're never gonna do this
out of the benefit for people.
They'll do this when
there's no other way.
Well, there was an interesting
statement from the Vatican,
right?
Where they talked
about how astronomers
said that there may be ET races.
And if so, they would never
have to convert to Catholicism,
because they wouldn't have
committed original sin?
Oh, right, right, right.
I remember this, yeah.
Yeah, that's an interesting
statement, isn't it?
Who knows what to make of that?
I think it's interesting
that elements
high up within the
Catholic church
have, over the last decade,
been making a few of these types
of statements that are different
from that of other versions
of the Christian religion.
I think they're
certainly a little
further ahead on this curve.
Do you think there's evidence
that there's different strata
or types of extraterrestrials?
I mean, people talk about
the grays, the Pleiadians.
I've seen channelers
who claim to bring
in extra-dimensional beings
from other worlds who
seem to be helpful.
I mean, do you think there's
a whole cosmic ecology?
Yeah, I think it's entirely,
I would say, not impossible,
but probably likely.
You've used the word--
-Probably like you, also.
-Right.
Who knows, right?
You've used the word
liminal a few times.
I think it's a very apt
word for this field.
Because what the
field of ufology
does, and it's only one
subset of this larger
alternative reality that
all of us are exploring,
we're near a limit of what our
where our consciousness is at.
In other words,
this field is taking
us right to the edge of what
we're almost able to grab,
I think.
That's why, look,
a lot of things
relating to this
phenomenon really
don't make sense
on a logical basis.
Whether you're talking
about human technology,
or non-human technology, or
even in inter-dimensional,
there's certain things that are
involved in this field that,
to our allegedly rational
minds, don't quite make sense
and some of the behaviors.
So I think what we're bumping
into is a reality-- you know,
you think of different
levels of creatures.
You think from insects
to a dog and to a human.
So an insect perceives certain
limited kinds of reality.
Your dog can perceive much more.
Your dog knows who you
are, and your dog knows
where its food is and so on.
But your dog doesn't
know what the moon is.
It can sense you telepathically
too when you're coming home.
Yes, I have a dog, and
I absolutely believe it.
But a dog doesn't really
know what the moon is.
Your dog doesn't know what a
city is, because the dog can't
understand it.
So here we are a little
higher up, but what's here?
You know, there are
concepts-- I mean,
our brains are set up
to perceive reality
spatially and temporally.
And that's just how we work.
But of course, as
we now understand it
in terms of
non-locality in physics,
time and space
really aren't what
our common sense says anyway.
So we're bumping up into kind
of a natural biological limit,
I think, of where we could be.
And those limits
can be expanded.
I believe this, but
nonetheless it's--
-It's a work in progress.
-That's right.
That's right.
Last question, because
we're about to take a break,
and bring on our next
guest, George Hansen,
and then bring you back to
have a dialogue with them.
But I'm curious
what kind of advice
you would give to
all the poor people
out there who are seeking
to make some sense of this,
and there are all
these websites.
There's the Cassiopaeans
and the Pleiadians.
How do people bring
discernment to this field?
Two critical things.
One is, you have to become
conversant with being
able to do your research.
If you're not willing to do
your own research, that is,
if you're not willing
to investigate,
then I would almost
say, don't even bother.
And that means, when there's
a claim that you encounter,
learn how to do at
least basic web searches
to get to the source of a
particular claim, or source
a particular image that comes
into your mailbox, a JPEG
image.
There are ways of doing this.
These are tools that are
available to anybody.
In other words--
Just to push back
for one second.
For instance, I was
fascinated by the carrot stuff
with that guy Isaac.
-Yeah.
But then you read conflicting
claims that it's all trash.
This guy Isaac claimed that he
worked for a secret government
program reverse
engineering technology
that corporations had sponsored.
And so he had images
of the technology,
and the sort of signals that
were on the pieces, and so on.
Yeah, I think I'm actually
more persuaded them
not by the legitimacy of that.
So there you go.
But yes, there are certainly
a lot of criticisms,
obviously, saying
that's it's all bogus.
I actually don't feel that
that's actually the case.
I studied those
documents in some detail.
I will say that
he reads exactly,
exactly right,
for Silicon Valley
early 1980s defense industry.
It looks exactly right to me.
And the criticisms of the
images that they were not--
So essentially
what you're saying
is that you have
to be-- if you want
to really investigate
this realm,
there's no other
authority but oneself,
because there really
isn't another litmus test.
Yourself, provided
that you adhere
to certain basic, fundamental
rules of investigation
that any journalist should
know, or any trained
person would know, like how
to go to the original source.
And that's not infallible.
Nothing is, really.
And then the other thing
that I would recommend
is simply learn to
be a little bit more
comfortable with uncertainty.
It is not necessary that
we come to firm conclusions
about every single
one of these things.
There's a lot that
we're not going to know,
and you've gotta be
comfortable with that,
and be prepared to have
your reality shifted.
Right on.
Cool.
Thank you so much, Richard.
It's so awesome to talk
to you about this stuff.
You're a great,
level-headed voice
and presence in this area.
So we're gonna take a break,
and come right back with George
Hansen, and then we'll bring
Richard and George together
for the dialogue.
[APPLAUSE]
NARRATOR: Known for his
work, "The Trickster
and the Paranormal,"
George P Hanson is
a writer and parapsychologist.
He's active in a number
of psychic, UFO, and New
Age organizations,
and was professionally
employed in parapsychology
laboratories for eight years.
During that time, he
conducted many experiments
in the field of remote viewing,
seance phenomena, ghosts,
and many more.
He poses the idea that
paranormal events are
most often sighted when
society is in disorder,
and that there's a correlation
between all different aspects
of the unknown.
George Hansen is a number
of the International
Brotherhood of Magicians.
[APPLAUSE]
Hey, everybody.
Welcome back to "Mind Shift,"
and I'm delighted to be
joined today by George Hansen.
How you doing, George?
Very well.
Thanks so much for coming by.
Thank you.
Maybe just tell us a
little bit about your work,
your background,
and how you arrived
at writing about tricksters
and paranormality.
OK, I worked eight years in
parapsychology laboratories,
three years at the Rhine
Center down in Durham,
North Carolina, and five
at psychophysical Research
Laboratories in Princeton.
I came to realize that
there were some rather
peculiar aspects to this field.
First of all, we did some
pretty good research,
but it wasn't really getting
much scientific acceptance.
There were pretty
massive campaigns to try
to discredit the research.
In the '70s, '80s?
I worked professionally in the
field eight years in the 1980s.
So 1981 until 1989.
Also, I was involved in
a number of small groups
with psychics and
mediums and the like.
So you were the one who
was setting up experiment
parameters and stuff like that?
-Oh, yes.
Yes, I did statistical analysis.
I set up methodology, monitored
computer equipment, fixed it.
So on telepathy,
telekinesis, clairvoyance?
Yes, remote viewing,
mind over matter,
influencing electronics,
random number generators,
working in what was called the
Ganzfeld Condition, which was
partial sensory deprivation
in a telepathy type
of experimental
design, as well I
was having personal contact
with a lot of psychics
and other people in
paranormal fields.
So I started realizing that
there were peculiarities.
One is that, well, these
groups never get very big.
They never really
institutionalize effectively.
A laboratory might last
10, maybe 20 years,
and it falls apart.
Funding dries up.
There's right now virtually
no universities in the US
that are doing any kind of
legitimate experimental work.
Well, you do have the
Institute of Noetic Sciences.
-That's not a university.
-Oh, I know.
That's a fringe
institution anyway.
It's basically--
Just so people know,
the Institute of Noetic
Sciences was created by the
astronaut Edgar Mitchell,
I believe--
-Yes.
--To explore psychic
research, psychic phenomena.
Yes.
There's a number of
scientists who work there doing
experiments, like
Dean Radin, who
I guess is the most prominent.
-Yes.
It's still a relatively
small operation.
Radin is probably
the most well known.
Marilyn Schlitz
is also associated
with that institution,
and I work with her.
In fact, I was a
participant judge
in her very first published
remote viewing experiment.
Great.
So go ahead.
So you were talking about
how there's some odd aspects
to the whole field.
One is the marginality.
And why is it that this does
not become institutionalized?
Why is it sneered at?
And this is not something new.
And I started to do some
research to try to understand
what was going on.
And one of things I
came across was the fact
that these phenomena
had been sneered
at and put down for literally
2,000 years, if not more.
This is not something new.
Also, if one starts to
think about these phenomena,
especially if you get
into UFO type phenomena
with entity experiences, these
phenomena traditionally have
been the realm of religion.
Earlier societies certainly
understood the reality
of these phenomena,
and had some very
interesting ways of dealing
with them via myth and ritual.
Ritual was used the
control, channel,
and influence
paranormal, supernatural,
or supernormal forces.
Ritual has been used for
thousands of years to do that.
There's also myth.
Earlier civilizations
used myth to describe
and to understand these forces.
So what we're dealing
with is something
that has been around for a
very, very, very long time.
And it has always
been in dispute.
These debates
about the reality--
Myth is a very fascinating
subject, obviously.
I mean, Patrick Harper,
who in some ways,
I mentioned to you, his
work and your work, I think,
have interesting
correspondences.
He talks about how the myth
is almost like the edge of how
we create a world in a way.
The world we're experiencing
is the myth we're in, in a way,
you know?
Perhaps.
I don't think of
it in those terms.
I contrast myth with more a
scientific, rationalistic,
empirical approach.
But there is some overlap.
Patrick Harper's work I have
a greater appreciation for,
but his approach is quite
different than my own.
OK, for sure.
So go ahead.
You're talking about the
myth and ritual and religion
and so on.
Yes, and so there were
a number of other aspects
that fit in here.
And in our culture, If
you look at the dollars
allocated to the
paranormal, where are they?
Well, movies like "Independence
Day," or "ET," or "Ghost,"
and "Ghostbusters" literally
took in hundreds of millions
of dollars in box
office receipts--
hundreds of millions of dollars.
In 2011, MUFON,
which is largest UFO
organization in
this country, had
an annual budget of $180,000.
So you've got three orders
of magnitude, 1,000 times
budget money going into
fictional portrayal
and entertainment than
into serious science.
So what were some
of your conclusions
from this kind of research?
Well, there's a lot
more to be said.
Really to understand
these phenomena,
one should look at
analysis of ritual.
And there's some very
interesting work on ritual done
by a man named Arnold van
Gennep, and another one
name Victor Turner.
And Turner came up with
the term liminality,
a state betwixt and between.
Now, the concept of
liminal and liminality
is very, very difficult
to convey in 10 minutes,
or an hour, or even two hours.
I've tried at
numerous conferences.
Well, you might have an
audience, both in the studio
and in the viewing public that
has a deeper understanding
than the average audience.
I think it would take very
long time, even for a relatively
educated audience.
Well, let's try in a minute.
Let's not.
I want to take another approach.
I want to look at this from
a mythological standpoint
and from structural
anthropology.
Structural anthropology
is a bit more easily
explained in a limited time.
OK.
Structural anthropology
and structuralism in general
got going in France
in the 1960s,
a little bit earlier,
primarily through the work
of Claude Levy-Strauss, a
very eminent anthropologist.
And in structuralism,
there's a central idea--
and this got a lot of support--
that earlier civilizations
and societies divided
things into opposites,
binary oppositions.
And let's get the
graph up there.
OK, George, I got it
right here for you.
So you have life and death,
god and human, heaven and earth,
male female, human and beast.
Now, you'll see
this top line here,
generally these elements
have a little bit more power,
a little bit more prestige.
They're thought of
a little bit more
positively than
these lower elements.
And today, we think, OK, life
is very different than death.
Pretty clear distinction,
not always, but generally.
God and human--
very, very different.
Heaven and earth, yes,
completely different ideas.
Male and female, those
are really clear cut.
Human and beast, those
are very, very distinct.
Nice, clean, very easily
understood concept.
However, if you start--
and there are many
anthropology books that you can
find these kinds of listings
in.
However, if you start looking
in this between realm,
let's turn it over.
We find some very
interesting phenomena
between life and death.
Well, what blurs
that distinction?
Well, ghosts do.
Mediums tend to
contact the deceased,
blurring that distinction.
Is a person alive or dead?
If they can still communicate,
are they in some sense alive?
Near death experiences, spirits,
that draws into question
is that distinction
quite so clear?
Mystics between God
and human-- mystics
strive to become
one with the divine,
and it is among mystics
that the most powerful
paranormal phenomena ever
recorded have occurred,
not only in Christianity,
but in other cultures
and other religions as well.
Between the Heavens and the
Earth, we have UFOs and angels.
Angels are messengers.
UFOs come from the stars.
Between male and
female, in a number
of American Indian
cultures, there were
people called the berdache.
These are people who took
the role of the opposite sex.
These were looked upon as
having supernatural powers,
and often many of
them became shamans.
Between human and beast?
Well, there's
accounts of Bigfoot,
werewolves, and vampires.
All of these now are
called paranormal, or
supernormal, or supernatural.
This is not new.
But this realm here
is a liminal realm.
It's betwixt and between
these binary oppositions.
And it is a realm of taboo.
It is a realm of
ritual observance.
And it has been looked
upon as a bit dangerous.
George, I'm gonna
put the diagram down.
That's fine.
So that realm has very
different properties.
But let's bring that up again.
Well, let's talk
about the trickster.
No, let's bring that up again.
[CHUCKLING]
This thing is, we show betwixt
and between these elements
of the binary oppositions.
However, if you start
talking to people
who have these
experiences, you will
find people who have had
ghost experiences might have
contact with angels or UFOs.
Many government remote
viewers had UFO experiences.
And Nick Redfern recently
had a post online,
and he's not the
first, that talked
about the number of Bigfoot
sightings in you UFO flaps.
These merge together.
These are not separate.
This is a very, very
different kind of realm.
This is what we're
dealing with, and this
is what religion has dealt
with for thousands of years.
And this is what is denied,
largely, in our culture today.
And what about psychic
phenomena, like telepathy,
for instance?
Are they liminal phenomena also?
Absolutely.
Telepathy blurs the distinction
between self and other.
Whose thought am I thinking?
We usually think of ourselves
as distinct entities.
Telepathy seriously
challenges that idea.
So let's talk about the
concept of the trickster
and how that fits
into your mapping.
The trickster is
an abstract concept,
but virtually all cultures
have had trickster figures.
And in some of them, for
instance, the Navajo,
these trickster figures
encode some very,
very deep meanings that are
generally not directly grasped.
There's a folklorist
named Barre Tolken.
Who happened to marry
into the Navajo,
and he had been
studying the trickster
for literally decades, I
think two to three decades.
And one night, he was
sitting with a medicine
man, called a singer.
And the singer
asked him, well, why
are you studying the trickster?
Do you wanna lose a
member of your family?
And Tolken started looking into
the trickster even more deeply,
and realized even after
decades of studying it,
there was a great deal
he had not understood
about magical practice.
So he was being warned
there's a danger in that magic,
resonating, reverberating
negatively back
on the investigator in a way?
Yes, and other people as
well, people in the vicinity.
So there are reasons
that ritual has
been used to hedge off
paranormal or supernatural
forces.
This is not new.
What do you mean by hedge off?
To limit the intrusion of
the divine into the world.
If magic is
occurring frequently,
it has side effects.
One of the side effects
is that disruption
of personal relationships.
If you start looking at ghost
groups, or UFO groups that
get out and are doing
on-site research,
you will find lots of
interpersonal frictions,
rivalries, and
eventually schisms,
a lot of recriminations.
I've been an adviser to
a number of ghost groups,
and there is a term now
called paradrama that
applies to ghost researchers.
These groups do not last.
They do not effectively
institutionalize.
There are thousands of
groups around the world.
Do you think it's a good thing
if they were to effectively
institutionalize?
Or are you just observing
it as a phenomenon
without a negative or
positive charge to it?
Well, I think there
have certainly been
attempts to institutionalize.
They have failed.
And I think this is
very important data.
It helps us understand.
And in fact, in Victor
Turner's work on liminality,
he uses the term
anti-structure, things that
tend to blur, to
fall apart, become
ambiguous, that do not maintain
long term, stable relations.
And what we're seeing
in this liminal realm
is this effect of
anti-structure.
These groups who deal with these
phenomena tend to break up.
This is not something
pertinent to just this culture.
Other cultures as well
have understood this.
And in fact, there's
a group in East
Timor who have talked about it.
If a person sees a ghost
outside a ritual context,
that's a rather dangerous thing.
And if this happens frequently,
tensions between kin intensify.
So the contact with this
sacred, this liminal realm,
does have dangers, and has
implications for our society.
So here's my question for you.
One of my hypotheses-- I
know you read my 2012 book--
is that somehow as humanity
is evolving in consciousness,
we could make a shift where
we could actually integrate
these areas that
have been suppressed,
the psychic and the paranormal.
Do you think that's
a likely phenomenon?
I think quite the contrary.
As our societies
become more complex,
and the greater
division of labor,
we see a greater suppression
and demeaning of the paranormal
and the supernatural.
On one level, but then we
also see all these films,
like "Harry Potter," "The
Matrix," "Avatar," which
are over and over again not only
suggesting that this is very
crucial, or "Star
Wars," but there
needs to be some kind of
training program, or school,
or institution, whether it's
Hogwarts, or the initiation.
Au contraire.
I completely disagree with this.
No, the fiction, there
are thousands of times
more dollars spent on fiction,
as I alluded to previously.
What fiction does
is, this writes
the phenomena into fiction.
People do not have
to take it seriously.
They can play with it.
They can look at it, but they
don't really deal with it.
And this happens over,
and over, and over again.
The fiction is a very
important part of this,
but the fiction has a
very particular function.
And that is to keep people
thinking it is fiction,
and not take it seriously.
You can see the same
thing with the suppression
in both religion, and
with skeptics groups.
The Catholic Church's
catechism specifically
declares practice
of clairvoyance
going to be forbidden.
The skeptics group--
What about omniscience?
Just kidding.
The skeptics group, Committee
for Skeptical Inquiry,
ridicules such attempts.
So they both
effectively suppress
or deny the reality
of this, and it
has the same effect on society.
So fiction has a very
important role to play,
but the role is not to
stimulate the phenomena,
but to suppress it.
To get people to think
about just a little bit.
Oh, haha, this is fun,
fun to think about.
But they don't
take it seriously.
And you don't think
that's ever gonna change?
I don't think it will change
with the current structure
of society.
If society becomes
less hierarchical,
and there are more
competing groups
rather than a centralized
control, that might happen.
We see much more active
use of these phenomena
in hunter-gatherer
societies than we
do in agricultural and
industrial societies even less.
So social structure and our
relationship to the mysterious,
the divine, the
paranormal, the trickster
are so inherently related.
-Absolutely.
-Cool.
Well, we're about to bring
you on with Richard Dolan.
And just before we do,
though, I'm just curious.
Do you see what he maps out as
potentially secret government
to connection to
extraterrestrials
and some types of hyper
futuristic technologies
that have developed in secret?
Do you see that as a
liminal phenomenon,
or something that would
be at maybe a literal,
real parallel phenomenon?
I see it as
mythological phenomenon.
I think Roswell and
UFO area in general
is heavily imbued with myth.
And the myth takes
on a life of its own.
And people live myths, and
myths live through people.
And I believe what
we're seeing here
is this myth taking
a form of its own
through the social structure
in the intelligence community
and farther.
-Awesome.
Well, let's bring on Richard
and have a little discussion
around this.
Thank you so much, and
we'll back right back.
[SCREAMING]
[WHISTLING]
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[GIGGLING]
[APPLAUSE]
So I'm delighted to be back here
with my fellow insurance agents
to discuss the actuary
tables in New Jersey.
I'm so happy you
guys could join me.
No, just kidding!
We're here for "Mind Shift."
We're discussing the paranormal
and extraterrestrials.
So let's just jump into it.
George, you had some
interesting ideas
around the mythological nature
of the alien phenomenon.
And I'm curious for you
just to give us a sense,
do you think it's
literally happening?
Do you think it's
mythological happening?
Are those things ultimately
merging in some liminal dream
space that is our reality?
I think they're
definitely merging.
I think there's
a lot of reality.
There's no question
that the government
has provided a lot
of disinformation,
covered up UFO
cases and phenomena,
and doesn't really
wanna talk about it.
No question.
That's part of a myth.
That feeds into the
myth, and people
start accepting some of it.
Other people start
challenging it.
But all of this
focuses attention
on this whole idea of ET.
The myth is living in some
sense, through people.
But whether the government
really has crashed saucers
and are doing
reverse engineering,
I seriously doubt that.
OK, that's interesting.
And Richard, how
would you reply?
Well, I would say
that you had everything
great right up until
you started talking
about UFOs as purely myth.
I think you're really
misinformed on the topic,
or maybe just haven't
done enough research.
I don't know.
I think there's, first of
all, A, a tremendous amount
of evidence through
documentation to start,
that there's a definite reality
of somebody's technology
that is not accounted
for in this civilization.
Now, that could leave us with a
couple different possibilities.
In fact, this weekend,
I spoke to a friend
who's an aerospace engineer
who works for the government.
And he was saying that he's been
documenting crafts that seem
to have propulsion systems
that we have no explanation
for, no coherent
explanation for.
This happens frequently indeed.
I am not suggesting that
these phenomena are imaginary.
I do believe there is a physical
reality here, that there
are lights in the sky.
Some of these phenomena tend
to materialize, but then--
Are you using myth
in a different way
than maybe a colloquial way?
-Yes, yes.
-I thought so.
-Yes.
So how would you
say it's a myth,
and what does that
actually mean?
A myth is a pattern
that keeps repeating.
And people live through it.
It works like an archetype.
The certain collective
consciousness
has some idea that there is
something from outer space,
or from afar.
And it manifests somehow,
whether it's in our fiction.
I just wanna say that
your description of a myth
as a pattern that
keeps repeating
is identical to Rupert
Sheldrake's ideas
around the laws of
nature themselves,
that the idea that
they're actually fixed
and immutable laws is only a
construct of a certain type
scientific mentality, that they
might be more like habit habits
or patterns that
recur repeatedly
and verifiably over time to
the point where they seem
like permanent immutable laws.
I would be very
sympathetic to that, yes.
OK, so great go ahead.
So I'm not challenging
Richard Dolan's idea
that there are physical
entities out there of some type.
I do seriously question
whether they are nuts and bolts
craft, advanced technology
from some other civilization.
What else would they be?
They are something
we don't understand.
They might be alive.
They might be some
projection from ourselves.
I don't really spend
much time on that.
It reminds me of this story of
this guy, an anthropologist who
was hanging out with
Australian Aboriginals,
and he was trying to
get them to explain
their concept of the dream
time and the dreaming.
And the aboriginal
pointed to a jet plane
that was going across the sky.
And he said, white man dreaming.
[GIGGLING]
Well, something alive, sure?
You know, we're hitting
up against a reality that
is at the limits of
what we are sometimes
really able fully to grasp.
But I would say there's a
danger that I sometimes hear,
where people are inferring
that this phenomenon is almost
purely a reflection
of our own thoughts.
And I think that's
a real mistake.
I agree.
What if it's a co-creation
of our own thoughts?
Co-creation with what?
I mean, that's kind
of fuzzy to me.
There's something
that is causing people
to react, to see,
and experience,
and measure, measure
phenomenon that's there.
So what is that?
Now, obviously,
our minds perceive
a certain portion of the whole
electromagnetic spectrum.
Our minds perceive a certain
portion of the reality
that's around us.
So we're selecting, clearly.
But there's something
that is affecting us,
and the question
is what is that?
I think it's a real
mistake, and this even
goes to someone like
Jung, if in fact, he
did assume that this is purely
a reflection of our unconscious,
or somehow us.
I think that's a mistake.
I think the whole
question of what it is--
It's not even that it's a
reflection of our unconscious.
It's more that there
are these processes.
Like, the archetypes or
the collective unconscious
has a reality that's almost
greater than ours in a sense.
We're more like
emanations of it,
and then these
processes are happening
through the collective
psyche, in a sense.
I'm not sure that even
the question of what is it
really makes any sense
or is really useful.
I think we should look
at its properties.
When does it occur?
What side effects does it have?
What kinds of people interact
with these phenomena?
What kinds of
people report them?
I think that's going to give us
a lot more insight than trying
to speculate as to what it is.
We need to find out the
properties, the characteristics
of these phenomena.
Well, when you have to
literally more than 10,000
reports filed in North America
alone every single year,
I can tell you that the
people who report it
are, basically,
everybody, every age, and
every sociological breakdown.
Just a question, though.
If we were to do what
you said, and approach it
in that sort of
phenomenological manner,
and let's say we
began to determine
what the phenomenon was, then
what would be the next step?
Well, we have to
know what it is
before we know the next step.
For instance, if you have strong
contact with these phenomena,
one's life tends to become
a little bit unsettled.
I think that's a very
significant aspect of this.
The groups that try to study
these phenomena don't last.
Well, you have somebody
like Steven Greer,
and I have a number of friends
have now gone on missions
with him, where he
claims that he's
able to reliably bring
these craft into some kind
of manifestation.
So in a sense, you
could say that he's
creating his own ritual, and
he's then having an effect.
And it's also
somewhat cult-like.
Greer's work is not scientific.
It is much more
religious and cult-like?
What isn't a cult, though?
Is capitalism not a cult?
Greer is a charismatic leader.
Capitalism does not rely
upon charismatic leaders,
by and large.
So the religious definition,
or sociological definition,
of a cult, I think Greer
would come very close to that.
He is clearly a
charismatic figure,
and has drawn many
people to him.
He does not seem to be terribly
scientifically interesting.
But there are people I know
who are not believers in Greer,
or part of his
cult. And they go,
and they've had these verifiably
reliable experiences craft
or lights appearing and so on.
I don't deny that all.
In fact, I would suspect that.
I've known a number of people
in other religious groups
who had similar types
of UFO encounters.
So I am not discounting
the phenomena themselves.
One idea that a
number of researchers
have become fascinated with is
the prospect that there could
be another type of
energy technology
that, if this phenomenon
is real in some sense,
they're not getting
here on coal or nuclear,
so the idea that there's some
type of a zero point field,
or free energy, or the
ability to draw on the quantum
fluctuations of the vacuum.
And then an idea that
develops from that
is that that
technology would almost
be one that would require
consciousness mediation.
I think it could very
well be the case, Daniel.
Certainly, look, a child who
would see a flying saucer,
let's just say, that
zips around the sky.
It's obviously not
using petroleum.
So it's using
something different.
And something like the zero
point energy field, I think,
is a reasonable possibility.
Even Tesla, I think, was really
working along those lines,
it seems to me.
So there's a solution there.
Now, the consciousness
connection, I think,
is a very intriguing one.
And certainly what you have in,
let's call it the research--
if we can call the
research, among claims--
is that consciousness is a
key part in the operation
of some of these craft.
One hears this claim frequently.
And I think it's a reasonable
thing to wonder about.
And at the same time, we're
seeing our technologies,
communications technologies,
seeming to be moving almost
towards that, in
a sense becoming
more and more subtle,
more and more consciously
directed somehow.
I think what we may
be looking toward is
a kind of cybernetic
future, and maybe that's
what these other beings are.
In other words, a combination of
advanced biological, artificial
biological, life forms,
biological nonetheless
with technological enhancements.
And if that's the
case, then you could
easily interface with your
web, or with your craft,
or whatever.
OK, but these
types of phenomena,
you're describing normal
physics, essentially,
or slightly expanded,
would not account
for things like precognition.
And precognition
is a very widely
reported paranormal phenomenon.
It involves
consciousness, and it
has been reported for
thousands of years,
and has been generally
regarded as myth,
as untrue among normal
physical scientists.
So also the technology
explanation does not explain--
How would you account
for precogntion, then?
I mean, I have my way
of accounting for it.
I don't try to account for it.
I look at the effects of it.
What kinds of people have it?
What happens when precognitive
experiences happen?
What kinds of
events surround it?
So I don't try to build
a theoretical model based
on something without data.
Also, the technological
explanation of UFOs
does not explain the
breakup of UFO groups,
and the little
institutionalization
and the very pretty
heavy prevalence of fraud
and deception in
the government, as
well as hoaxers and the like.
Yeah, you discuss that
in your trickster book,
in terms of how there's a
level of deception and trickery
that's related to
psychic phenomena
as part of this liminal
realm, in a sense.
Yes.
Cool, we only have
a few minutes left,
and we could so easily
have, like, a five hour
dialogue that I think would also
be really, really interesting.
Easily.
And I'm so happy that both
of you joined me today.
Thank you very much.
I'll ask you a last question.
30 years from now, 20 to 50
years from now, let's say,
are we gonna know anything
extremely, extravagantly
different than we know now?
Are we gonna be in a
more psychic dimension?
Are we gonna be playing ping
pong with extraterrestrials?
What's gonna be going on?
What your perspectives?
Well, I was a
friend of Phil Klass.
And Phil Klass has
his famous curse.
You will know no more
on your death bed
than you do know about UFOs.
And I suspect that's
largely the case.
I think the progress
in these fields
is gonna be very, very slow.
I would agree that
throughout the last 20, 30, 40
years of this,
researchers have thought,
OK, now is the time where
we're gonna break through.
We're gonna get the secret.
It'll all come down.
You know, this isn't the first
time in our modern history
where researchers thought, OK,
we're gonna get disclosure.
They thought this 20 years ago.
They thought this
30, 40, 50 years ago.
It didn't happen.
However-- however,
this is different.
We're in a fundamentally
different era now.
And I see us in the next--
Of course, they probably said
that 20, 30 years ago, also.
Yeah, but this is
really different.
This is really, truly different.
I mean, we've had
the last 20 years
of the web, which
have completely
transformed this world.
We are able to communicate
with each other in ways
that we could not have
dreamed of 20 years.
I mean, we're able to
broadcast this to an audience,
which before the web, wasn't--
Are we caught in the web, or
are we able to step around it?
No, we're using the web.
And the web is a good
thing in this regard.
And it's transformed us.
But that's only one aspect of
this greater transformation.
I think in 20 years
from now, we're
gonna be living in a society
that-- I don't think any of us
can really predict exactly
how it will be different,
but I think it will be
dramatically different.
And that means politically.
That means financially.
There are a number
of revolutions,
I think, we're right
on the cusp of.
And that means scientifically
in a lot of key ways.
So I think that we're
gonna have a very
different kind of basis
of what we consider
our fundamental knowledge.
And I believe-- I don't
know, but I believe
that one of those
things will be a more
open recognition of, let's
call it, the UFO phenomenon.
That doesn't mean
we'll have the answers.
So in a way, George,
he's, I would say,
reflecting what you said before,
that if our social structure
changes sufficiently, then new
possibilities emerge, and even
a new mythology
allows for a new,
quote unquote, literal
or real phenomena
then, to take place within it.
Yes.
Last thing I'll just
say, we're on a cusp.
We're at a crossroads.
And we're either gonna move into
a situation of a really awful
global fascism,
global, or something
better than that,
something in which
it's a more horizontal,
less hierarchical
kind of a structure.
Or are you still thinking
in binary oppositions?
Well, look, I don't know what
you really mean in that sense.
I think that we're
moving either--
there's a battle that's
taking place right now.
And it is a battle between--
Could we both have a total
authoritarian, totalitarian
situation that's also
incredibly awesome,
where everybody has evolved to
a higher level of psychic being?
We would have an awesome
totalitarian system
if everyone's vegged out in
their own little private Idaho
with their own little fantasies,
and their own little three
dimensional holographic
realities, which would
be not really my paradise.
But I think that's--
On the other hand, this might
already be a three dimensional
holographic reality,
and we're being
projecting into
it from some type
of a technological interface.
Yeah, that's a
theory, actually,
from one mathematician.
I read his work, and
that's actually his belief.
Who knows, right?
Maybe we'll never know that.
But I do think that
we're at a crossroads,
and things could get
really, really dark,
or they could go
in a different way.
And if they're gonna
go in a better way,
it's gonna take not just
simply consciousness, per se,
but political consciousness.
People are gonna really have to
organize and make some changes
in the structure of power.
-OK, awesome.
So we're gonna rise up.
We're gonna do it.
Thank you so much for
being with me here today.
It was an awesome discussion.
I look forward to many more over
the course of however much time
we have or whatever time is.
[APPLAUSE]